---
title: 'Leadership anti-patterns: Doing too much line level work'
slug: leadership-anti-patterns-doing-too-much-line-level-work
---
# Leadership Anti-patterns: Doing too much line level work
This post is part of the larger series on Leadership Anti-patterns. Doing too much line-level work can keep leaders from being leaders and taking care of the long term success for their teams. Line-level work is essential to a team's success, and there are times when leaders have to help their teams; however, leaders must take care to avoid having their teams depend on the extra help.

## What is line-level work?
Line-level work is the work that front-line employees on a team do. For a technical support team, line-level work is most likely answering and resolving customers' phone calls, chats, and support tickets. A software development team's line-level work could be writing code, producing documentation, and recording and organizing work tickets. A factory's line-level work would literally be the work done by employees at the assembly lines. Line-level work is some of the most important work a company or a team does and is essential to the success of the company or team.

### What is your team's line-level work?
If you are a leader, you probably have a good idea of what the line-level work for your team is. However, if you take time to consider the work your team members do you may find there are tasks or responsibilities your team has that you did not realize were line-level work. Look at the work an individual team member does and find out what that person does every single work day. The tasks the team member does every day are probably line-level work and essential to the operations of the team. Then, consider the work that the entire team does. Does every single team member do one or more tasks regularly? If so, that probably also constitutes line-level work. You may find as well that there are tasks that are not essential to your team's operations and can be eliminated or streamlined.

## Why do leaders do line-level work?
Leaders often do line-level work when there is sudden demand that exceeds what the team has the resources to handle. This can be a deadline that has moved up or is sooner than what the team can meet. The demand, as in the technical support team, example could be a rush of customers calling in for assistance. It can be a burst of sales from a celebrity promoting the company's product. Whatever the case, leaders can often provide the additional support and assistance to get the team through difficult times. Leaders should pitch in when there is a need such as this, even if it is just to get food and drinks for the line-level team members or to take care of time-consuming, menial tasks on behalf of the team.

## When doing line-level work becomes an anti-pattern
Doing line-level work becomes an anti-pattern when it keeps the leader from leading the team. Pitching in every now and again is perfectly fine for a leader and is part of being an effective leader for your team, but having your team's regular operations depend on your ongoing, regular contributions to line-level operations makes your team less successful over the long run. Time that you spend doing line-level work is time not spent on leading your team. As a leader, you cannot plan for the enrichment and development of your team members if you are too busy taking phone calls, working on the assembly line, or writing code. You are not as able to keep up with the progress and status of the team's overall operations and progress. Leaders who are spending all of their time doing day-to-day team work do not have the capacity to plan for the team's future and to invest in the team's ongoing success. This kind of practice may seem like the right solution, especially if you have to meet deadlines, targets, or key performance indicators, but failing to support the team's development and growth will make your team unable to meet your requirements even with your help.

## How do you avoid doing too much line-level work?
Avoiding doing too much line-level work can be a difficult challenge for a leader. If your team genuinely does not have enough people or resources to meet the day-to-day needs of team operations you must advocate for obtaining more help for your team from your company or your department. Getting more resources for your team can be one of the most challenging things to do. Your company may have already budgeted the resources for your team and cannot increase the head count for your team despite the increase in work. In this kind of situation, if additional resources are not an option, you may have to ask your leader for help from other teams or other leaders to fulfill your responsibilities. Perhaps some of your administrative responsibilities can be reassigned to other members of the company. Maybe some team members from other teams can help your team with the work your team has to do until the unexpected demand is over. You may also be able to work with your leader to find alternative long-term solutions to the demand, like restructing your communication flow or work processes to be more efficient.

Besides obtaining more resources, one of the most important things for a leader to avoid doing too much line-level work is accepting that there likely will always be more work that can be done. You have to be able to let go of the need to do more work for your team. You will make a much bigger impact on your team's success by being a leader and spending your time on how to improve the team's overall performance and your team members' individual performance than you ever could by consistently doing your team's work for them. Doing the line-level work also means you are unable to support your team members' own work. When they need your help, you will not be available to help them if you are too busy working on line-level tasks. This kind of missed opportunity can ultimately contribute to your team losing team members, which would cancel out any kind of gain your team has from you doing your team members' work. Your team will be better able to handle their work if you are there and free to help them and support them through the difficult time.

## The pattern for when your team needs help
By all means help your team from time to time when they need help. Just be careful to step back occasionally and ask yourself if your team only needs help temporarily or on a permanent basis and what changes can you make to help your team do their work more effectively or to help alleviate the cause of the additional workload. One of the most important things is that your team knows you support them and will do your best to advocate for them.