---
title: Managing the Q and A
slug: managing-the-q-and-a
---
# Managing the Q and A

## What is the Q and A?
The Q and A are the Questions and Answers that follow most presentations. They are the questions presentation listeners ask, and the answers you give. The Q and A section of a presentation can be the most stressful or the most difficult if you are not well-prepared or if you do not have experience handling this part of a presentation. You can try to anticipate the questions that people might ask you and put those in your presentation, but there will still be questions you do not expect or that you did not consider. The questions may be as simple as clarifying something in the presentation or as complex as analyzing your topic from an entirely new perspective. There are specific things you can do, however, to manage the Q and A session very well. Forming answers on-demand to unexpected questions is a skill that you can develop with planning and practice.

## Why is the Q and A Important?
The questions and answers portion of a presentation is your chance to demonstrate your knowledge on the topic and your skill as a presenter. It is your chance to shine and to make a good presentation into a great experience for your audience. How well you answer your audience's questions determines how confident your audience is in your abilities and how competent you are in your position in relation to the topic. This is especially important when your presentation is supposed to convince someone of the value or merit of a course of action. In a persuasive presentation, your ability to respond to the audience's answers can have a big impact on how well the audience views your product, proposal, or plan. If your audience does not feel you are a competent presenter or are confident in your knowledge, they will not be confident in the quality of your proposal or product. For some audiences, like the executives or business decisionmakers for your organization, the questions and answers portion of your presentation is their chance to test you and to test your ability to represent the company, your team, and yourself. They may intentionally ask difficult questions to see how well you respond under pressure. Some of these questions may be questions that have to get answered anyway so the audience members can better assess how the proposal will impact the rest of the organization. The questions and answers section of a presentation also demonstrates how well you have prepared overall to speak about the topic. Anyone can put together good slides for a presentation given enough time; not very many people can provide insightful, well-thought answers to unexpected questions on the spot. Your success in the questions and answers portion of a presentation can be a huge factor in whether or not your idea, information, or proposal is accepted by your audience.

### The Q and A is the Last Thing Your Audience Sees
The questions and answers portion of your presentation is usually the final thing your audience sees. There is a suggested bias in memory towards the last information that is provided in an explanation, argument, or presentation. In fact, putting the thing you want the listener to believe or take away as the last thing you say is a rhetorical strategy used when trying to persuade someone to believe something or take a course of action. If the questions and answers section of your presentation goes poorly, your audience will be more likely to view the rest of your presentation negatively since the questions and answers portion was the last thing they recall.

## How to Prepare for the Q and A

### Become a subject matter expert
Possessing information is a key part of answering questions about a given topic. When presenting on a topic, you should do your best to make sure that you know as much about the topic as you can ahead of giving the presentation. People are likely to assume that you are an expert on the topic if you are giving a presentation on it. They are expecting to learn new information from you. Much of this information can be conveyed through the presenation itself, but your perceived quality and credibility as a presenter will be significantly improved or degraded by how well you can speak about the topic and can respond to questions. Any answer you give is going to be based on what you know about a topic at the very minimum. It is perfectly ok to admit you do not know the answer to a question; however, failing to answer simple questions or basic questions about the topic can seriously undermine your credibility as a presenter.

### Take really good notes
Any topic has more information than can be easily remembered or recalled on demand without further notice. Taking down notes is as important to developing subject matter expertise as doing the original research. Effective notetaking helps you to learn and to remember content, and well-organized notes provide a quick reference for when you know you have an answer to a question even you cannot remember the answer itself.

When someone asks you a question about your topic that you do not have an answer for, you should make a note of the question, the answer you find, and follow up with the asker to provide the answer. The questions people ask you can reveal new applications for or avenues of exploring the topic you are going to present on.

### Explain your topic as often as you can
Practice is one of the best ways to prepare for the Q and A part of a presentation. To practice, try explaining your topic to co-workers, family members, and friends as much as they will let you. Ask them to help you by listening and asking questions so they understand what you are doing or what you are talking about. The questions they ask and their various backgrounds and level of knowledge on your topic will force to consider how to explain your topic to difference audiences. You would not explain a relatively technical or advanced topic to your family the same way you would to a co-worker or someone who has similar experience or knowledge as you with the topic. When you do explain your topic in this way, you should keep it informal and casual. Practicing your presentation is certainly essential, and you may ask some of these same people to listen to your formal presentation. For this exersice, however, you should try to spontaneously explain your topic, and you should actively shape your explanation to match the listeners' background and previous knowledge. Having to develop multiple different explanations of your topic challenges you to look at your topic in different ways and helps you practice coming up with new answers or connecting information in new ways.

### Accept that you will not know the answer
It is perfectly ok to admit that you do not know the answer to someone's question. Admitting that you do not know can be hard to do, but it is often easier than trying to make up an answer or escaping the question. You can still take time to consider the question and try to formulate an answer. If time allows, working through the question to an answer can be a very helpful and educating exercise for you and the audience, especially if you are presenting to a small audience or group. It is very important, if possible, to follow up with an audience member who asks a question for which you do not have an answer. That helps improve your understanding, and it gives you a chance to show your skill and credibility to that audience member.

### Understand your audience
You can get an idea about the kinds of questions you are going to be asked by looking at the audience you expect for your presentation. For a presentation on a new piece of technology to an audience of systems administrators, software developers, and IT professionals you can probably expect to see more technology-oriented or technical questions, like how fine-detailed questions about how the technology works or how it will be integrated with other technologies already in use. If you are presenting to a product marketing team or an executive team on the same piece of technology, the audience will likely ask questions about the value proposition, costs, or business case for using or adopting the technology. They likely will not focus as indepth on the technical implementation or how the technology works at a fine-detailed level. In case of a mixed audience with a mix of disciplines, consider who the presentation is for exactly or who are the primary decisionmakers in the audience. A presentation on the business value of a new proposed product or technology to a team of marketers, executives, and technology professionals will still have a distinct set of audience members who decide to accept the proposal. In this case, the executives could be the decisionmakers, and the other skilled professionals are only there to verify what is being presented and to provide information the executives need to further inform their decisionmaking. That may not always be the case, though. Some executive teams may want their product marketing team or technology professionals to accept and sign off on a proposed product or change before the executive team will consider the proposal further.

For any audience you should be able to make a good guess at who will be in the audience based on the purpose of the presentation. A presentation at a technology conference will likely draw an audience of technology professionals. A presentation to a small team of professionals across your own company may involve many disciplines; however, when giving a presentation to coworkers, you should be able to have the list of attendees for the presentation. If you have the attendee list, it can be very helpful to do at least basic research about who each of the attendees is, such as the person's title, role, responibilities, and background. Much of that information can be obtained from employee directories, newsletters, and simply asking your co-workers. If you do not know an attendee personally, you likely know someone who does or who could provide you with the information you need or somewhere to find that information.

### Have a good presentation
If you presentation is low quality, your audience will be less likely to ask questions or to pay attention to you at the end of your presentation, when questions and answers are normally done. Your audience's questions will likely be about your presentation or about the information you provided in your presentation. If your presentation is not clear and informative, the audience will not know what they should ask, or they will feel like asking you further questions would be a waste of time. Your presentation establishes your basic credibility to talk about the topic, and the question and answers session further builds your credibility as a subject matter expert.

## How to Handle Questions and Answers

### Restate the question
When you are asked a question that you do not immediately have an answer to or do not understand, take a moment to restate the question in your own words to confirm with the asker that you know what the question means. It is extremely important to understand the question before you start to answer it, and asking the questioner for confirmation is a simple, effective way to do that. Restating the question can also be an effective strategy to buy yourself time to put together an answer to the question. Of course, you should not restate every single question that is asked of you if you can avoid it.

### Ask probing questions
If you are asked a question that you understand but that is unclear or you are not sure what answer the asker is looking for, ask your own questions for more information. You can ask for an example situation related to the question or for the asker to elaborate further on the question. In these cases it can be helpful to say something like "I think I understand what you are asking, but I want to make sure I have all of the information before I answer. Can you tell me more?". You can also ask the questioner for why they asked the question. In many cases, the asker has a problem or has an experience that is behind the question, and the asker is looking to understand how your information, proposal, or product could help them. As with restating the question, asking probing questions can also be a good strategy for composing your thoughts for an answer or for fine-tuning your answer to the asker's individual situation; however, it is very important that you listen to the information the asker is providing in response to your probing questions.

### Answer confidently
To the best of your ability, give your answers with as much confidence as you, especially if you do not know an answer. How you answer questions can be as important as what your answers are to the questions. If your tone and body language does not express confidence, your audience will be less confident in your answers. It is perfectly normal to be nervous, but you still must communicate your information as well as possible. Preparing for your presentation and practicing your presentation are two of the biggest factors in how confident you will feel during the questions and answers portion of a presentation. Having comfort and command of your subject matter in general is another major factor in how confident you are speaking about your topic.

### Say I don't have an answer
You may think that admitting you don't have an answer would undermine your credibility, but confidently admitting you do not know is usually much more successful than trying to make up an answer or giving a answer that does not directly speak to the question. In some cases, you cannot provide an answer because it would reveal a trade secret or may be inappropriate to provide in a public setting. You may not be able to answer because the question is about something that was outside the scope of the research you did or does not actually apply to the topic at hand. In most cases, admitting you do not have an answer will be accepted by the audience, even if they perhaps are not 100% satisfied.

In cases where you just do not know the answer, by all means say so and offer to find out the answer. This strategy is especially important and effective in presentations to co-workers. Following up with the questioner helps that person to know you are credible and you do care about the question and providing an answer. Following up with the question also forces you to do more research and build your own understanding.

### Solicit audience feedback
In presentations to small teams, especially with your co-workers, if you do not have an answer to a question you can often ask someone else for more information or for their input. You may have a greater understanding of the overall project or proposal being presented, but if there is someone in the audience who can answer that question referring the question to that person can help make sure the question gets answered. If the other audience member still cannot answer the question, both of you now know something your team needs to answer.

### Do not become defensive
The questions you are asked during the questions and answers section of your presentation may seem personal or may seem like attacks. It is extremely important to not become defensive or offended by the questions. Most of the time, the questioner does not mean to attack you or to undermine you or your proposal. In the few cases where someone is trying to undermine you, the best tactic is to confidently answer their questions or concerns in a non-confrontational, fact-based way or simply admit you had not considered the scenario. Becoming defensive can quickly make a question and answer session into an argument with a single questioner or multiple questioners. Arguing with your audience is a very effective way to ruin your presentation and any impact you may have made with the information you provided.

### Express gratitude
It takes some effort and work to come up with a good question and ask it in front of an audience. Your questioners are probably nervous to ask their questions, even though they do want more information. You should respect and appreciate their effort and their engagement. It is a good practice to thank questioners for their questions and for the chance their questions provide to cover information or examples that could not be included in the presentation due to time or other constraints. Expressing gratitude for your audience also helps build a better relationship with the audience by showing them that you do value their time and their input. An attitude of gratitude also helps keep you from becoming defensive when someone asks you a difficult, inconvenient, or inappropriate question.

## After the Q and A

### What were the hardest questions to answer?
The hardest questions you were asked often reveal the areas of your topic or knowledge that you need to expand or refine further. Hard questions are usually hard because you did not fully know the answer, you had not considered the given situation, or you do not have a good way to explain the information to someone with the audience member's background or level of knowledge. You can use these questions to make a plan for what you need to do to build your own subject matter knowledge and to prepare for the next presentation and questions and answers you have. Some of these questions may even specifically make it into your presentation to address if they are useful for everyone interested in a subject to know. It is easy to miss important questions or concerns despite becoming a subject matter expert on a topic.

### What could you have done to make things better?
Every presentation is a chance to improve your presentation, your knowledge, and your presenting skills. Use the suggestions for preparation from above to provide a framework for continuously refining your presentation, your knowledge, and your ability to extemperaneously speak about your topic of expertise. The more you do so the easier it will be for you to come up with things to say about your topic on demand in response to your own questions you have and to the questions you are asked.