---
title: "Leadership Anti-patterns: Losing your domain expertise"
slug: leadership-anti-patterns-losing-your-domain-expertise
---
# Leadership Anti-patterns: Losing your domain expertise
This post is part of a larger series on Leadership Anti-patterns. You also were probably promoted into a leadership role at least in part for your ability to do your job and your knowledge of your team's operations. However, as a leader, you probably are no longer directly doing the day-to-day work for which your team is responsible.  Even if you are, you may not be doing as much of the work as your front line team members. That is not a bad thing. Your front line team members should be the ones doing most of the team's day-to-day work, and they should be better at the work your team does than you. However, too often leaders, especially new leaders, do not make time to maintain the skills and capabilities they had when they were front line team members. Losing your domain expertise, unfortunately, can make you a less effective leader for your team even though it seems like the right thing for you to do.

## What is domain expertise?
Your domain is the skills, knowledge, experience, and information that applies directly to the work you and your team does. You are a domain expert in your role when you fully understand the work you do, how that work fits into your organization or team's mission, and can explain your role to others. A technical support agent, for example, would know how to troubleshoot and support a specific technology or system. The front desk agent at a hotel would understand how to use the hotel's property management system, the characteristics of the hotel, and how to provide good customer service. For a software developer, the domain expertise would be writing code, software architecture, or best practices when developing a program. Your domain expertise and your team's domain expertise is generally whatever it is your team does every day and is responsible for accomplishing for your company or organization.

## What is your domain expertise?
You probably already know what your domain expertise is if you are a leader of a team. Your team's domain expertise generally is the unique set of skills and knowledge within your organization that your team uses to do their job. It is what you teach your team members to do, and the experience they accrue over time as they perform their roles.

## Why do leaders lose their domain expertise?
There can be many reasons leaders lose their domain expertise. Two of the main causes are time and your responsibilities. As a leader, you likely have plenty of meetings, tasks, and other responsibilities requiring your time. It is easy to get caught up in your role as a leader and find several months or even years have passed since the last time you did particular tasks or operations you used to do that your team members do every day. You may find that you really do not remember how to do certain common or simple tasks or that the way you used to do things no longer applies. Even if you do have the time, you may no longer be responsible for the tasks that would allow you to keep your domain expertise, even though you are the leader responsible for those tasks being completed. This can mean that you no longer have the necessary access to keep up your domain expertise. You may also risk disrupting your team's operations by trying to share some of their workload.

## When losing your domain expertise becomes an anti-pattern
Losing your domain expertise becomes an anti-pattern when you can no longer lead your team as effectively as you once could. There are several ways losing your domain expertise can hinder your ability to lead, including but not limited to damaging your credibility, losing touch with your team members' experience, making you less able to respond quickly to changes affecting your team, or advocate for your team within your organization.

### Damaging your credibility
For most leaders, your ability to do your team's work was likely a major factor in your promotion into a leadership role. But, if after promotion, you lose your ability to do your team's work, your team members may lost their trust in your ability to help them. You are likely one of the first resources they turn to when they have questions about how to do their jobs. If you cannot answer their questions or assist them, your team members will stop looking to you as someone they can count on for support with their jobs. This can undermine their trust in you and your decisionmaking in other areas, especially if they feel like you are making decisions for the team without understanding what the team does.

### Losing touch with your team members' experience
When you become a leader, you do become separated to some degree from the experience your team members' have doing their jobs day in and day out. This distance is an important part of managing and leading a group of people. If you were too close you may lose track of the bigger picture and miss important changes in your group. However, this same distance means you miss out on encountering the same frictions and pain points your team members experience as a normal course of doing their jobs. These kinds of pain points can make your team members' jobs harder, more time-consuming, or more uncomfortable to do. Your team members may have to spend their effort creating workarounds that may violate safety or security best practices, if not company or team policies. Some of these pain points may even contribute to team members leaving your team or the organization if the team members feel they are being needlessly made to suffer, or if team leadership (i.e. you) does not care enough about the team to fix the issues. Of course, you probably do not even know these issues exist or are so serious for your team members if you do not occasionally shadow a member of your team or try to live their experience, even if for a short period of time.

### Less able to respond quickly
If you lose your domain expertise, you likely lose track of the trends and currents in your area of expertise. You may have stopped reading or following industry publications or news sources related to your team's work. If you no longer regularly use your team's tools and processes, you may miss updates or changes that would require your team to change how they operate. If you do not know what is happening with the tools and processes your team uses, the trends and changes in the services your team provides, or in the relevance of your team to your company and your users, you will not be able to guide your team through these disruptions. A significant disruption to your team can easily put your team on a cycle of self-destruction as you lurch from one preventable crisis to another.

## Cannot advocate for your team within your organization
Depending on the size of your organization, your team may be one unit among many other units competing for the organization's limited resources. If you cannot clearly articulate your team's mission and how that mission fits within the organization's overall mission you can quickly find your team on the list of items to be cut to save costs. Losing touch with the work your team does and the expertise your team has means you have lost touch with the value your team generates for the organization. This may not seem so much of a concern for a team that is part of the core mission for the organization, but even those teams can struggle to receive sufficient resources to meet their operational needs when team leaders cannot explain how more resources would improve the team's effectiveness or capacity.

## How can you keep your domain expertise?
Continuing to develop your domain expertise can be extremely difficult, especially considering all of the other responsibilities you, as a leader, likely have. You will have to commit some portion of your time to practicing your craft and further building up your skills.

One of the most effective ways to keep your domain expertise is to do some of the work your team is responsible for. Occasionally and regularly helping your team is a terrific way to keep your skills refreshed and to stay familiar with your team's experience. You can find pain points that your team members have not told you about, and you may have better insight into how your team's processes can be improved. You must be extremely careful to avoid having your team depend on your contributions to their operations. Doing too much of your team's line-level work is itself a leadership anti-pattern. If you are doing too much line-level work, you will not have time to be a leader for your team.

If you have time for personal professional development, building in some tasks or study that focus on your team's work can help you to keep your knowledge up-to-date and make sure you have the ability to help your team if they ever need you to join in day-to-day team operations. Of course, professional development time is probably as rare to find as free time during your normal work day.

By all means you do not have to be an expert in your team's work to be an effective. Your team members really should be better than you at doing your team's work because they do it every single day and you do not.

## The pattern of preserving your domain expertise
A leader who continues to developer and expand domain expertise in the team's operations will be able to answer or find an answer for the problems and questions team members encounter. The leader will also be able to advocate for real, meaningful improvements to the quality of work life for team members and for the ongoing value of the team to the organization's operations. Your team members will trust you and your decisions more if they feel you understand their experience.