---
title: JavaScript Frameworks and You
slug: javascript-frameworks-and-you
---
# JavaScript Frameworks and You

## Introduction
It seems like every day there is a new JavaScript framework for your user interface. What is a framework? How do you know which one to use or to learn? What do frameworks even do for you? Whatever happened to jQuery?

## What is a JavaScript Framework?
A JavaScript framework generally is a collection of tools and utilities for building dynamic user interfaces. They can vary significantly in how they enable you to create a user interface and how the interface functions in use. They often, but not always, provide some degree of state-management; re-usable components or templates; wrapper functions for common tasks like making HTTP requests or interacting with browser storage APIs; and code bundling, transpiling, optimizing, and minifying.

### State Management
State is the exact and complete status of the application at any given point in time. The application's state includes but is not limited to any data the application has retrieved from remote sources, any input the user has entered, any events or data that has been generated by the application during normal use, and often the history of the user's use of the application.

Most frameworks provide tools for managing state either built-in or through a plugin or add-on. These frameworks will automatically sync your interface's appearance to match changes in state in the application. Without the framework, these changes would have to be manually made every single time application state changes using pure JavaScript or another library manipulating the page's elements directly. Making manual changes to the page directly is usually more complicated than using a framework for state management. Frameworks are also usually very well optimized for making those changes more efficiently and safely than manually editing the page.

### Re-usable Components
Much of the convenience and value for frameworks comes from writing the code for a part of the interface once and then reusing that code throughout the user interface as-is without having to copy and paste it or otherwise recreate the interface component. This same functionality also enables developers to easily share their components with other developers as packaged modules.

### Wrapper Functions
Modern browsers natively provide a great deal of functionality for modern JavaScript applications, but much of that functionality is relatively low-level and not very convenient for JavaScript developers to use. JavaScript frameworks often provide wrapper functions that make accessing functionality like HTTP requests, browser storage, and manipulating page elements more convenient, simpler, and safer than when using pure JavaScript. There are some frameworks that intentionally do not provide this functionality and expect developers to use other libraries for those tasks.

### Code Bundling, Transpiling, Optimizing, Minifying, etc.

#### Bundling
Modern JavaScript frameworks (and modern JavaScript projects in general) usually consist of tens, hundreds, or even thousands of interconnected JavaScript files. JavaScript developers use bundlers like Webpack, Babel, or Rollup to analyze and build all of their JavaScript code into a small collection of easily linkable static JavaScript files web browsers can load to run JavaScript applications. Packaging all of the JavaScript code into a small number of files, even if they are larger files, significantly reduces the work browsers have to do to download the JavaScript application's code. Bundlers often perform several other tasks at build time, like transpiling, optimizing, minifying, and adding shims or other compatibility enhancements.

##### Shims
Shims are small snippets of JavaScript that implement modern JavaScript features that are not found in older browsers or runtime environments for JavaScript. They can help ensure code can run in multiple versions of browsers with uneven levels of support for the JavaScript features and APIs.

#### Transpiling
Several modern framworks support languages that are derived from JavaScript but are not the same as pure JavaScript, such as TypeScript, CoffeeScript, and Dart. Even frameworks that use JavaScript can use one of the different major not completely compatible or supported versions of JavaScript such as the various versions of ECMAScript. However, modern browsers can only read pure, plain JavaScript (or supported versions of ECMAScript). Frameworks written in these other languages use transpilers to convert TypeScript, CoffeeScript, Dart and other similar languages to pure, plain JavaScript that browsers can understand. Humans may not be able to understand the JavaScript produced by transpiling, but that is usually not a problem.

#### Optimizing
Frameworks cannot run in browsers as-is and have to be processed and converted into JavaScript that can run in browsers. Frameworks usually produce relatively well-optimized code that should provide good performance inside of users' browsers once the JavaScript application's code has been downloaded.

#### Minifying
Minifying is the process of removing spaces, line breaks, and other extra, not-strictly required characters from code files. Minifying can significantly decrease the size of text files, like JavaScript, HTML, or CSS files. Decreasing the size of the files helps browsers download them faster.

### Framework vs. Library
Not all JavaScript UI frameworks are technically frameworks. Some of them are really libraries. The primary difference between the two is how opinionated the tool is about how things are done. The tools are probably a framework if they require doing things exactly how they prescribe and if they require using their own code to carry out common tasks, like make HTTP requests, instead of using someone else's code. For example, Angular would be considered a framework because it provides its own way of doing just about everything you need to do to build a JavaScript application. React, in contrast, focuses primarily on the user interface and state management and relies on an ecosystem of third-party plugins to provide features like routing, more complex state management, and HTTP requests. This distinction really probably only matters when considering which JavaScript user interface tool to use.

## Which Framework Should I Use?
It depends! The framework (or library) to use depends primarily on your previous knowledge and experience, the task at hand, your own personal goal for development. There are some other factors to consider, however, like how many people use the software, who develops the software, and what is the third-party support for the software.

### Previous Knowledge
If you already know how to use Angular, React, Vue.js, Svelte, or another framework by all means go with what you know and can produce value with as quickly as possible, especially if you are developing for work or someone else.

However, if you are not familiar with any of them, you can still look at how comfortable you are with making HTTP requests, managing session, updating a page, and responding to events using JavaScript. It may be better to go with something like React if you have a favorite HTTP requests library (e.g. Axios, Superagent, etc.) or state management library (Redux, Backbone.js, etc.) so you can continue using that library instead of having to do things the framework's way.

### The Task at Hand
What exactly are you trying to do? Are you trying to build a complex, multi-page/view single-page application? Or are you looking to embed a dynamic widget inside of an existing page or web application? Each framework or library have its benefits and costs. Angular is probably a solid choice for a full application because it provides everything you need built-in to easily and quickly build a multi-page complex application. However, it probably has many things you do not need if you are looking to embed a widget in an existing page. For something like that, a library like React may be a better choice. Of course, you can use Angular to make a widget and React to make a complex multi-page application, but some frameworks may be better suited to particular tasks than others.

### Your Personal Goal
What are you hoping to get out of the framework you are considering? If you are just looking at a framework or library to learn something new, by all means try out something new. But if you are looking to advance your career or are working on a project for work, do try to consider which framework would be most valuable to your project or to your career. That will be discussed more next in other considerations.

### How Many People Use the Framework?
This question is especially important for projects for work or where other people will have to maintain the software you write. It generally is better to use the frameworks and tools your team already uses so someone else can support your code; however, you can still introduce new tools to your team, but it is important to plan how you can help your team learn the new tools to the same level as current tools.

A widely used framework also tends to have better support and likely has more job opportunities with teams using the framework to build applications.

[The State of JS](https://stateofjs.com/) is an excellent resource for viewing trends in JavaScript like how many people are using the most popular frameworks, libraries, and tools.

### How Many People Develop the Software?
The number of teams and people developing new versions of software can be a useful indicator of how long the software will continue to receive updates and improvements. A framework or software project that only has a single developer, even a large corporation, probably will receive fewer updates or be at greater risk of being abandoned than a project with a variety of contributors from individual hobbyists to small teams to large corporations. Larger, more diverse communities also help prevent a single stakeholder from dictating to users how the software should change over time.

### What is the Third-party Support?
Outside of the framework itself and its support, consider all of the plugins, tools, and other software that exists to augment or ease using the framework or library. For example, React has an ecosytem of third-party plugins for providing a wide array of additional functionality. Angular has tools like Angular CLI, special Material Design components and other reusable tools and components. Such investment by other developers can be a good indicator of how confident they are in the value and success of the framework.

## Whatever Happened to jQuery?
jQuery did not go anywhere. It is still doing what it has always done. I admit I have not had much call to extensively use jQuery. I have always been able to meet my needs with pure JavaScript, a framework, or a third-party library appropriate for the specific task at hand. It seems like jQuery provided extremely important features and functionality during JavaScripts infancy, but significant work has been done to bring JavaScript up to the standards and requirements of a full general purpose programming language.

For the most part, it probably is not necessary to use jQuery if you are using a framework like React, Angular, Vue.js, or Svelte. Those frameworks take care of updating the page view for you in response to events; otherwise, browser APIs for common tasks like HTTP requests and managing local storage have significantly advanced over the years.

But if you like jQuery and that is what you use, by all means use it; however, pay special care to how jQuery interacts with your chosen framework to avoid conflicts.

## Wrapping It All Up
The most important thing is to find the tool that you enjoy using that helps you accomplish your goals. There are plenty of articles and posts that analyze the specific merits and demerits of React, Angular, Vue.js, Svelte, and other frameworks. Those can be useful guides and resources, but the important thing is to keep in mind your own personal needs and objectives and find a framework that meets your needs.